 
 Chapter 18. Relaxed Cone Stepping for Relief Mapping | NVIDIA Developer 
 GPUGems 
 GPUGems2 
 GPUGems3 
 GPU Gems 3 
 GPU Gems 3 is now available for free online! The CD content, including demos and content, is available on the web and for download .
 You can also subscribe to our Developer News Feed to get notifications of new material on the site. 
 Chapter 18. Relaxed Cone Stepping for Relief
 Mapping 
 Fabio Policarpo 
 Perpetual Entertainment 
 Manuel M. Oliveira 
 Instituto de Informática—UFRGS 
 18.1 Introduction 
 The presence of geometric details on object surfaces dramatically changes the way light interacts with these
 surfaces. Although synthesizing realistic pictures requires simulating this interaction as faithfully as
 possible, explicitly modeling all the small details tends to be impractical. To address these issues, an
 image-based technique called relief mapping has recently been introduced for adding per-fragment
 details onto arbitrary polygonal models (Policarpo et al. 2005). The technique has been further extended to
 render correct silhouettes (Oliveira and Policarpo 2005) and to handle non-height-field surface details
 (Policarpo and Oliveira 2006). In all its variations, the ray-height-field intersection is performed using a
 binary search, which refines the result produced by some linear search procedure. While the binary search
 converges very fast, the linear search (required to avoid missing large structures) is prone to aliasing, by
 possibly missing some thin structures, as is evident in
 Figure 18-1a . Several space-leaping techniques have
 since been proposed to accelerate the ray-height-field intersection and to minimize the occurrence of aliasing
 (Donnelly 2005, Dummer 2006, Baboud and Décoret 2006). Cone step mapping (CSM) (Dummer 2006) provides a
 clever solution to accelerate the intersection calculation for the average case and avoids skipping height-field
 structures by using some precomputed data (a cone map). However, because CSM uses a conservative approach, the
 rays tend to stop before the actual surface, which introduces different kinds of artifacts, highlighted in
 Figure 18-1b . Using an extension to CSM that consists
 of employing four different radii for each fragment (in the directions north, south, east, and west), one can
 just slightly reduce the occurrence of these artifacts. We call this approach
 quad-directional cone step mapping (QDCSM). Its results are shown in
 Figure 18-1c , which also highlights the technique's
 artifacts. 
 Figure 18-1 Comparison of Four Different
 Ray-Height-Field Intersection Techniques Used to Render a Relief-Mapped Surface from a 256x256 Relief Texture
 In this chapter, we describe a new ray-height-field intersection strategy for per-fragment displacement mapping
 that combines the strengths of both cone step mapping and binary search. We call the new space-leaping algorithm
 relaxed cone stepping (RCS), as it relaxes the restriction used to define the radii of the cones in
 CSM. The idea for the ray-height-field intersection is to replace the linear search with an aggressive
 spaceleaping approach, which is immediately followed by a binary search. While CSM conservatively defines the
 radii of the cones in such a way that a ray never pierces the surface, RCS allows the rays to pierce the surface
 at most once. This produces much wider cones, accelerating convergence. Once we know a ray is inside the
 surface, we can safely apply a binary search to refine the position of the intersection. The combination of RCS
 and binary search produces renderings of significantly higher quality, as shown in
 Figure 18-1d . Note that both the aliasing visible in
 Figure 18-1a and the distortions noticeable in
 Figures 18-1b and
 18-1c have been removed. As a space-leaping
 technique, RCS can be used with other strategies for refining ray-height-field intersections, such as the one
 used by interval mapping (Risser et al. 2005). 
 18.2 A Brief Review of Relief Mapping 
 Relief mapping (Policarpo et al. 2005) simulates the appearance of geometric surface details by shading
 individual fragments in accordance to some depth and surface normal information that is mapped onto polygonal
 models. A depth map [1] (scaled to the
 [0,1] range) represents geometric details assumed to be under the polygonal surface. Depth and normal maps can
 be stored as a single RGBA texture (32-bit per texel) called a relief texture (Oliveira et al. 2000).
 For better results, we recommend separating the depth and normal components into two different textures. This
 way texture compression will work better, because a specialized normal compression can be used independent of
 the depth map compression, resulting in higher compression ratios and fewer artifacts. It also provides better
 performance because during the relief-mapping iterations, only the depth information is needed and a one-channel
 texture will be more cache friendly (the normal information will be needed only at the end for lighting).
 Figure 18-2 shows the normal and depth maps of a
 relief texture whose cross section is shown in
 Figure 18-3 . The mapping of relief details to a
 polygonal model is done in the conventional way, by assigning a pair of texture coordinates to each vertex of
 the model. During rendering, the depth map can be dynamically rescaled to achieve different effects, and correct
 occlusion is achieved by properly updating the depth buffer. 
 Figure 18-2 Example of a Relief Texture 
 Figure 18-3 Relief Rendering 
 Relief rendering is performed entirely on the GPU and can be conceptually divided into three steps. For each
 fragment f with texture coordinates ( s , t ), first transform the view direction
 V to the tangent space of f . Then, find the intersection P of the transformed viewing
 ray against the depth map. Let ( k , l ) be the texture coordinates of such intersection point
 (see Figure 18-3 ). Finally, use the corresponding
 position of P , expressed in camera space, and the normal stored at ( k , l ) to shade
 f . Self-shadowing can be applied by checking whether the light ray reaches P before reaching
 any other point on the relief. Figure 18-3 
 illustrates the entire process. Proper occlusion among relief-mapped and other scene objects is achieved simply
 by updating the z-buffer with the z coordinate of P (expressed in camera space and after
 projection and division by w ). This updated z-buffer also supports the combined use of shadow mapping
 (Williams 1978) with relief-mapped surfaces. 
 In practice, finding the intersection point P can be entirely performed in 2D texture space. Thus, let
 ( u , v ) be the 2D texture coordinates corresponding to the point where the viewing ray reaches
 depth = 1.0 ( Figure 18-3 ). We compute ( u ,
 v ) based on ( s , t ), on the transformed viewing direction and on the scaling factor
 applied to the depth map. We then perform the search for P by sampling the depth map, stepping from
 ( s , t ) to ( u , v ), and checking if the viewing ray has pierced the relief
 (that is, whether the depth along the viewing ray is bigger than the stored depth) before reaching ( u ,
 v ). If we have found a place where the viewing ray is under the relief, the intersection P is
 refined using a binary search. 
 Although the binary search quickly converges to the intersection point and takes advantage of texture
 filtering, it could not be used in the beginning of the search process because it may miss some large
 structures. This situation is depicted in
 Figure 18-4a , where the depth value stored at the
 texture coordinates halfway from ( s , t ) and ( u , v ) is bigger than the depth
 value along the viewing ray at point 1, even though the ray has already pierced the surface. In this case, the
 binary search would incorrectly converge to point Q . To minimize such aliasing artifacts, Policarpo et
 al. (2005) used a linear search to restrict the binary search space. This is illustrated in
 Figure 18-4b , where the use of small steps leads to
 finding point 3 under the surface. Subsequently, points 2 and 3 are used as input to find the desired
 intersection using a binary search refinement. The linear search itself, however, is also prone to aliasing in
 the presence of thin structures, as can be seen in
 Figure 18-1a . This has motivated some researchers to
 propose the use of additional preprocessed data to avoid missing such thin structures (Donnelly 2005, Dummer
 2006, Baboud and Décoret 2006). The technique described in this chapter was inspired by the cone step mapping
 work of Dummer, which is briefly described next. 
 Figure 18-4 Binary Versus Linear Search 
 18.3 Cone Step Mapping 
 Dummer's algorithm for computing the intersection between a ray and a height field avoids missing height-field
 details by using cone maps (Dummer 2006). A cone map associates a circular cone to each texel of the depth
 texture. The angle of each cone is the maximum angle that would not cause the cone to intersect the height
 field. This situation is illustrated in Figure 18-5 
 for the case of three texels at coordinates ( s , t ), ( a , b ), and ( c ,
 d ), whose cones are shown in yellow, blue, and green, respectively. 
 Figure 18-5 Cone Step Mapping 
 Starting at fragment f , along the transformed viewing direction, the search for an intersection
 proceeds as follows: intersect the ray with the cone stored at ( s , t ), obtaining point 1 with
 texture coordinates ( a , b ). Then advance the ray by intersecting it with the cone stored at
 ( a , b ), thus obtaining point 2 at texture coordinates ( c , d ). Next,
 intersect the ray with the cone stored at ( c , d ), obtaining point 3, and so on. In the case of
 this simple example, point 3 coincides with the desired intersection. Although cone step mapping is guaranteed
 never to miss the first intersection of a ray with a height field, it may require too many steps to converge to
 the actual intersection. For performance reasons, however, one is often required to specify a maximum number of
 iterations. As a result, the ray tends to stop before the actual intersection, implying that the returned
 texture coordinates used to sample the normal and color maps are, in fact, incorrect. Moreover, the 3D position
 of the returned intersection, P ', in camera space, is also incorrect. These errors present themselves
 as distortion artifacts in the rendered images, as can be seen in
 Figures 18-1b and
 18-1c . 
 18.4 Relaxed Cone Stepping 
 Cone step mapping, as proposed by Dummer, replaces both the linear and binary search steps described in
 Policarpo et al. 2005 with a single search based on a cone map. A better and more efficient ray-height-field
 intersection algorithm is achieved by combining the strengths of both approaches: the space-leaping properties
 of cone step mapping followed by the better accuracy of the binary search. Because the binary search requires
 one input point to be under and another point to be over the relief surface, we can relax the constraint that
 the cones in a cone map cannot pierce the surface. In our new algorithm, instead, we force the cones to actually
 intersect the surface whenever possible. The idea is to make the radius of each cone as large as possible,
 observing the following constraint:
 As a viewing ray travels inside a cone, it cannot pierce the relief more than once . We call the
 resulting space-leaping algorithm relaxed cone stepping .
 Figure 18-7a (in the next subsection) compares the
 radii of the cones used by the conservative cone stepping (blue) and by relaxed cone stepping (green) for a
 given fragment in a height field. Note that the radius used by RCS is considerably larger, making the technique
 converge to the intersection using a smaller number of steps. The use of wider relaxed cones eliminates the need
 for the linear search and, consequently, its associated artifacts. As the ray pierces the surface once, it is
 safe to proceed with the fast and more accurate binary search. 
 18.4.1 Computing Relaxed Cone Maps 
 As in CSM, our approach requires that we assign a cone to each texel of the depth map. Each cone is represented
 by its width/height ratio (ratio w / h , in
 Figure 18-7c ). Because a cone ratio can be stored in
 a single texture channel, both a depth and a cone map can be stored using a single luminance-alpha texture.
 Alternatively, the cone map could be stored in the blue channel of a relief texture (with the first two
 components of the normal stored in the red and green channels only). 
 For each reference texel t i on a relaxed cone map, the angle of cone C i 
 centered at t i is set so that no viewing ray can possibly hit the height field more than
 once while traveling inside C i .
 Figure 18-7b illustrates this situation for a set of
 viewing rays and a given cone shown in green. Note that cone maps can also be used to accelerate the
 intersection of shadow rays with the height field.
 Figure 18-6 illustrates the rendering of
 self-shadowing, comparing the results obtained with three different approaches for rendering perfragment
 displacement mapping: (a) relief mapping using linear search, (b) cone step mapping, and (c) relief mapping
 using relaxed cone stepping. Note the shadow artifacts resulting from the linear search (a) and from the early
 stop of CSM (b). 
 Figure 18-6 Rendering Self-Shadowing Using
 Different Approaches 
 Relaxed cones allow rays to enter a relief surface but never leave it. We create relaxed cone maps offline
 using an O ( n 2 ) algorithm described by the pseudocode shown in Listing 18-1. The
 idea is, for each source texel ti , trace a ray through each destination texel tj , such that
 this ray starts at ( ti.texCoord.s , ti.texCoord.t , 0.0 ) and points to
 ( tj.texCoord.s , tj.texCoord.t , tj.depth ). For each such ray, compute its next
 (second) intersection with the height field and use this intersection point to compute the cone ratio
 cone_ratio(i,j) . Figure 18-7c illustrates
 the situation for a given pair of ( ti, tj ) of source and destination texels. C i 's
 final ratio is given by the smallest of all cone ratios computed for t i , which is shown in
 Figure 18-7b . The relaxed cone map is obtained after
 all texels have been processed as source texels. 
 Figure 18-7 Computing Relaxed Cone Maps 
 Example 18-1. Pseudocode for Computing Relaxed Cone Maps 
 for each
 reference texel ti do radius_cone_C(i) = 1;
 source.xyz = (ti.texCoord.s, ti.texCoord.t, 0.0);
for each
 destination texel tj do destination.xyz =
 (tj.texCoord.s, tj.texCoord.t, tj.depth);
ray.origin = destination;
ray.direction = destination - source;
(k, w) = text_cords_next_intersection(tj, ray, depth_map);
d = depth_stored_at(k, w);
if ((d - ti.depth) > 0.0)
 // dst has to be above the src
 cone_ratio(i, j) = length(source.xy - destination.xy) / (d - tj.depth);
if (radius_cone_C(i) > cone_ratio(i, j))
 radius_cone_C(i) = cone_ratio(i, j); 
 Note that in the pseudocode shown in Listing 18-1, as well as in the actual code shown in Listing 18-2, we have
 clamped the maximum cone ratio values to 1.0. This is done to store the cone maps using integer textures.
 Although the use of floating-point textures would allow us to represent larger cone ratios with possible gains
 in space leaping, in practice we have observed that usually only a small subset of the texels in a cone map
 would be able to take advantage of that. This is illustrated in the relaxed cone map shown in
 Figure 18-8c . Only the saturated (white) texels would
 be candidates for having cone ratios bigger than 1.0. 
 Figure 18-8 A Comparison of Different Kinds of
 Cone Maps Computed for the Depth Map Shown in 
 Listing 18-2 presents a shader for generating relaxed cone maps.
 Figure 18-8 compares three different kinds of cone
 maps for the depth map associated with the relief texture shown in
 Figure 18-2 . In
 Figure 18-8a , one sees a conventional cone map
 (Dummer 2006) stored using a single texture channel. In
 Figure 18-8b , we have a quad-directional cone map,
 which stores cone ratios for the four major directions into separate texture channels. Notice how different
 areas in the texture are assigned wider cones for different directions. Red texels indicate cones that are wider
 to the right, while green ones are wider to the left. Blue texels identify cones that are wider to the bottom,
 and black ones are wider to the top. Figure 18-8c 
 shows the corresponding relaxed cone map, also stored using a single texture channel. Note that its texels are
 much brighter than the corresponding ones in the conventional cone map in
 Figure 18-8a , revealing its wider cones. 
 Example 18-2. A Preprocess Shader for Generating Relaxed Cone Maps 
float4 depth2relaxedcone(in float2 TexCoord
 : TEXCOORD0, in Sampler2D ReliefSampler,
 in float3 Offset)
 : COLOR
{
 const int search_steps = 128;
 float3 src = float3(TexCoord, 0);
 // Source texel
 float3 dst = src + Offset;
 // Destination texel
 dst.z = tex2D(ReliefSampler, dst.xy).w;
 // Set dest. depth
 float3 vec = dst - src; // Ray direction
 vec /= vec.z;
 // Scale ray direction so that vec.z = 1.0
 vec *= 1.0 - dst.z;
 // Scale again
 float3 step_fwd = vec / search_steps;
 // Length of a forward step
 // Search until a new point outside the surface
 float3 ray_pos = dst + step_fwd;
 for (int i = 1; i < search_steps; i++)
 {
 float current_depth = tex2D(ReliefSampler, ray_pos.xy).w;
 if (current_depth < = ray_pos.z)
 ray_pos += step_fwd;
 }
 // Original texel depth
 float src_texel_depth = tex2D(ReliefSampler, TexCoord).w;
 // Compute the cone ratio
 float cone_ratio =
 (ray_pos.z > = src_texel_depth)
 ? 1.0
 : length(ray_pos.xy - TexCoord) / (src_texel_depth - ray_pos.z);
 // Check for minimum value with previous pass result
 float best_ratio = tex2D(ResultSampler, TexCoord).x;
 if (cone_ratio > best_ratio)
 cone_ratio = best_ratio;
 return float4(cone_ratio, cone_ratio, cone_ratio, cone_ratio);
} 
 18.4.2 Rendering with Relaxed Cone Maps 
 To shade a fragment, we step along the viewing ray as it travels through the depth texture, using the relaxed
 cone map for space leaping. We proceed along the ray until we reach a point inside the relief surface. The
 process is similar to what we described in Section 18.3 for conventional cone maps.
 Figure 18-9 illustrates how to find the intersection
 between a transformed viewing ray and a cone. First, we scale the vector representing the ray direction by
 dividing it by its z component ( ray.direction.z ), after which, according to
 Figure 18-9 , one can write 
 Equation 1 
 Likewise: 
 Equation 2 
 Solving Equations 1 and 2 for d gives the following: 
 Equation 3 
 From Equation 3, we compute the intersection point I as this: 
 Equation 4 
 Figure 18-9 Intersecting the Viewing Ray with a
 Cone 
 The code in Listing 18-3 shows the ray-intersection function for relaxed cone stepping. For performance
 reasons, the first loop iterates through the relaxed cones for a fixed number of steps. Note the use of the
 saturate() function when calculating the distance to move. This guarantees that we stop on the first
 visited texel for which the viewing ray is under the relief surface. At the end of this process, we assume the
 ray has pierced the surface once and then start the binary search for refining the coordinates of the
 intersection point. Given such coordinates, we then shade the fragment as described in Section 18.2. 
 Example 18-3. Ray Intersect with Relaxed Cone 
// Ray intersect depth map using relaxed cone stepping.
// Depth value stored in alpha channel (black at object surface)
// and relaxed cone ratio stored in blue channel.
void ray_intersect_relaxedcone(sampler2D relief_map,
 // Relaxed cone map
 inout float3 ray_pos,
 // Ray position
 inout float3 ray_dir)
// Ray direction
{
 const int cone_steps = 15;
 const int binary_steps = 6;
 ray_dir /= ray_dir.z;
 // Scale ray_dir
 float ray_ratio = length(ray_dir.xy);
 float3 pos = ray_pos;
 for (int i = 0; i < cone_steps; i++)
 {
 float4 tex = tex2D(relief_map, pos.xy);
 float cone_ratio = tex.z;
 float height = saturate(tex.w – pos.z);
 float d = cone_ratio * height / (ray_ratio + cone_ratio);
 pos += ray_dir * d;
 }
 // Binary search initial range and initial position
 float3 bs_range = 0.5 * ray_dir * pos.z;
 float3 bs_position = ray_pos + bs_range;
 for (int i = 0; i < binary_steps; i++)
 {
 float4 tex = tex2D(relief_map, bs_position.xy);
 bs_range *= 0.5;
 if (bs_position.z < tex.w)
 // If outside
 bs_position += bs_range;
 // Move forward
 else
 bs_position -= bs_range;
 // Move backward
 }
} 
 Let f be the fragment to be shaded and let K be the point where the viewing ray has stopped
 (that is, just before performing the binary search), as illustrated in
 Figure 18-10 . If too few steps were used, the ray may
 have stopped before reaching the surface. Thus, to avoid skipping even thin height-field structures (see the
 example shown in Figure 18-4a ), we use K as
 the end point for the binary search. In this case, if the ray has not pierced the surface, the search will
 converge to point K . 
 Figure 18-10 The Viewing Ray Through Fragment ,
 with Texture Coordinates () 
 Let ( m , n ) be the texture coordinates associated to K and let d K 
 be the depth value stored at ( m , n ) (see
 Figure 18-10 ). The binary search will then look for
 an intersection along the line segment ranging from points H to K , which corresponds to
 texture coordinates (( s + m )/2, ( t + n )/2) to ( m , n ), where
 ( s , t ) are the texture coordinates of fragment f 
 ( Figure 18-10 ). Along this segment, the depth of the
 viewing ray varies linearly from ( d K /2) to d K . Note that, instead, one
 could use ( m , n ) and ( q , r ) (the texture coordinates of point J ,
 the previously visited point along the ray) as the limits for starting the binary search refinement. However,
 because we are using a fixed number of iterations for stepping over the relaxed cone map, saving ( q ,
 r ) would require a conditional statement in the code. According to our experience, this tends to
 increase the number of registers used in the fragment shader. The graphics hardware has a fixed number of
 registers and it runs as many threads as it can fit in its register pool. The fewer registers we use, the more
 threads we will have running at the same time. The latency imposed by the large number of dependent texture
 reads in relief mapping is hidden when multiple threads are running simultaneously. More-complex code in the
 loops will increase the number of registers used and thus reduce the number of parallel threads, exposing the
 latency from the dependent texture reads and reducing the frame rate considerably. So, to keep the shader code
 shorter, we start the binary search using H and K as limits. Note that after only two
 iterations of the binary search, one can expect to have reached a search range no bigger than the one defined by
 the points J and K . 
 It should be clear that the use of relaxed cone maps could still potentially lead to some distortion artifacts
 similar to the ones produced by regular (conservative) cone maps
 ( Figure 18-1b ). In practice, they tend to be
 significantly less pronounced for the same number of steps, due to the use of wider cones. According to our
 experience, the use of 15 relaxed cone steps seems to be sufficient to avoid such artifacts in typical height
 fields. 
 18.5 Conclusion 
 The combined use of relaxed cone stepping and binary search for computing rayheight-field intersection
 significantly reduces the occurrence of artifacts in images generated with per-fragment displacement mapping.
 The wider cones lead to more-efficient space leaping, whereas the binary search accounts for more accuracy. If
 too few cone stepping iterations are used, the final image might present artifacts similar to the ones found in
 cone step mapping (Dummer 2006). In practice, however, our technique tends to produce significantly better
 results for the same number of iterations or texture accesses. This is an advantage, especially for the new
 generations of GPUs, because although both texture sampling and computation performance have been consistently
 improved, computation performance is scaling faster than bandwidth. 
 Relaxed cone stepping integrates itself with relief mapping in a very natural way, preserving all of its
 original features. Figure 18-11 illustrates the use
 of RCS in renderings involving depth scaling ( Figures
 18-11b and 18-11d ) and changes in tiling factors
 ( Figures 18-11c and
 18-11d ). Note that these effects are obtained by
 appropriately adjusting the directions of the viewing rays (Policarpo et al. 2005) and, therefore, not affecting
 the cone ratios. 
 Figure 18-11 Images Showing Changes in Apparent
 Depth and Tiling Factors 
 Mipmapping can be safely applied to color and normal maps. Unfortunately, conventional mipmapping should not be
 applied to cone maps, because the filtered values would lead to incorrect intersections. Instead, one should
 compute the mipmaps manually, by conservatively taking the minimum value for each group of pixels.
 Alternatively, one can sample the cone maps using a nearest-neighbors strategy. In this case, when an object is
 seen from a distance, the properly sampled color texture tends to hide the aliasing artifacts resulting from the
 sampling of a high-resolution cone map. Thus, in practice, the only drawback of not applying mipmapping to the
 cone map is the performance penalty for not taking advantage of sampling smaller textures. 
 18.5.1 Further Reading 
 Relief texture mapping was introduced in Oliveira et al. 2000 using a two-pass approach consisting of a prewarp
 followed by conventional texture mapping. The prewarp, based on the depth map, was implemented on the CPU and
 the resulting texture sent to the graphics hardware for the final mapping. With the introduction of fragment
 processors, Policarpo et al. (2005) generalized the technique for arbitrary polygonal models and showed how to
 efficiently implement it on a GPU. This was achieved by performing the ray-height-field intersection in 2D
 texture space. Oliveira and Policarpo (2005) also described how to render curved silhouettes by fitting a
 quadric surface at each vertex of the model. Later, they showed how to render relief details in preexisting
 applications using a minimally invasive approach (Policarpo and Oliveira 2006a). They have also generalized the
 technique to map non-height-field structures onto polygonal models and introduced a new class of impostors
 (Policarpo and Oliveira 2006b). More recently, Oliveira and Brauwers (2007) have shown how to use a 2D texture
 approach to intersect rays against depth maps generated under perspective projection and how to use these
 results to render real-time refractions of distant environments through deforming objects. 
 18.6 References 
 Baboud, Lionel, and Xavier Décoret. 2006. "Rendering Geometry with Relief Textures." In
 Proceedings of Graphics Interface 2006 . 
 Donnelly, William. 2005. "Per-Pixel Displacement Mapping with Distance Functions." In GPU Gems 2 ,
 edited by Matt Pharr, pp. 123–136. Addison-Wesley. 
 Dummer, Jonathan. 2006. "Cone Step Mapping: An Iterative Ray-Heightfield Intersection Algorithm." Available
 online at
 http://www.lonesock.net/files/ConeStepMapping.pdf .
 Oliveira, Manuel M., Gary Bishop, and David McAllister. 2000. "Relief Texture Mapping." In
 Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 2000 , pp. 359–368. 
 Oliveira, Manuel M., and Fabio Policarpo. 2005. "An Efficient Representation for Surface Details." UFRGS
 Technical Report RP-351. Available online at
 http://www.inf.ufrgs.br/~oliveira/pubs_files/Oliveira_Policarpo_RP-351_Jan_2005.pdf .
 Oliveira, Manuel M., and Maicon Brauwers. 2007. "Real-Time Refraction Through Deformable Objects." In
 Proceedings of the 2007 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games , pp. 89–96. 
 Policarpo, Fabio, Manuel M. Oliveira, and João Comba. 2005. "Real-Time Relief Mapping on Arbitrary Polygonal
 Surfaces." In Proceedings of the 2005 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games , pp. 155–162. 
 Policarpo, Fabio, and Manuel M. Oliveira. 2006a. "Rendering Surface Details in Games with Relief Mapping Using
 a Minimally Invasive Approach." In SHADER X4: Advance Rendering Techniques , edited by Wolfgang Engel,
 pp. 109–119. Charles River Media, Inc. 
 Policarpo, Fabio, and Manuel M. Oliveira. 2006b. "Relief Mapping of Non-Height-Field Surface Details." In
 Proceedings of the 2006 Symposium on Interactive 3D Graphics and Games , pp. 55–62. 
 Risser, Eric, Musawir Shah, and Sumanta Pattanaik. 2005. "Interval Mapping." University of Central Florida
 Technical Report. Available online at
 http://graphics.cs.ucf.edu/IntervalMapping/images/IntervalMapping.pdf .
 Williams, Lance. 1978. "Casting Curved Shadows on Curved Surfaces." In
 Computer Graphics (Proceedings of SIGGRAPH 1978) 12(3), pp. 270–274. 
 Last Update: 12:39 07/17/2009 -->
 Contributors 
 Foreword 
 Part I: Geometry 
 Chapter 1. Generating Complex Procedural Terrains Using the GPU 
 Chapter 2. Animated Crowd Rendering 
 Chapter 3. DirectX 10 Blend Shapes: Breaking the Limits 
 Chapter 4. Next-Generation SpeedTree Rendering 
 Chapter 5. Generic Adaptive Mesh Refinement 
 Chapter 6. GPU-Generated Procedural Wind Animations for Trees 
 Chapter 7. Point-Based Visualization of Metaballs on a GPU 
 Part II: Light and Shadows 
 Chapter 8. Summed-Area Variance Shadow Maps 
 Chapter 9. Interactive Cinematic Relighting with Global Illumination 
 Chapter 10. Parallel-Split Shadow Maps on Programmable GPUs 
 Chapter 11. Efficient and Robust Shadow Volumes Using Hierarchical Occlusion Culling and Geometry Shaders 
 Chapter 12. High-Quality Ambient Occlusion 
 Chapter 13. Volumetric Light Scattering as a Post-Process 
 Part III: Rendering 
 Chapter 14. Advanced Techniques for Realistic Real-Time Skin Rendering 
 Chapter 15. Playable Universal Capture 
 Chapter 16. Vegetation Procedural Animation and Shading in Crysis 
 Chapter 17. Robust Multiple Specular Reflections and Refractions 
 Chapter 18. Relaxed Cone Stepping for Relief Mapping 
 Chapter 19. Deferred Shading in Tabula Rasa 
 Chapter 20. GPU-Based Importance Sampling 
 Part IV: Image Effects 
 Chapter 21. True Impostors 
 Chapter 22. Baking Normal Maps on the GPU 
 Chapter 23. High-Speed, Off-Screen Particles 
 Chapter 24. The Importance of Being Linear 
 Chapter 25. Rendering Vector Art on the GPU 
 Chapter 26. Object Detection by Color: Using the GPU for Real-Time Video Image Processing 
 Chapter 27. Motion Blur as a Post-Processing Effect 
 Chapter 28. Practical Post-Process Depth of Field 
 Part V: Physics Simulation 
 Chapter 29. Real-Time Rigid Body Simulation on GPUs 
 Chapter 30. Real-Time Simulation and Rendering of 3D Fluids 
 Chapter 31. Fast N-Body Simulation with CUDA 
 Chapter 32. Broad-Phase Collision Detection with CUDA 
 Chapter 33. LCP Algorithms for Collision Detection Using CUDA 
 Chapter 34. Signed Distance Fields Using Single-Pass GPU Scan Conversion of Tetrahedra 
 Chapter 35. Fast Virus Signature Matching on the GPU 
 Part VI: GPU Computing 
 Chapter 36. AES Encryption and Decryption on the GPU 
 Chapter 37. Efficient Random Number Generation and Application Using CUDA 
 Chapter 38. Imaging Earth's Subsurface Using CUDA 
 Chapter 39. Parallel Prefix Sum (Scan) with CUDA 
 Chapter 40. Incremental Computation of the Gaussian 
 Chapter 41. Using the Geometry Shader for Compact and Variable-Length GPU Feedback 
 Preface 
